The people of [[Mir]] are remarkably diverse in their biology, origins, magical inclinations, and cultures; there are many sentient species, with their own cultures and civilizations taking shape across the millennia. While the [[Fey|fey]] created what could be called the first civilization in [[history]], the [[First World]], many have risen and fallen in the tens of thousands of years since, built by the various peoples of Mir:
### Major Populations
*The biggest populations living on Mir, in descending order based on estimated total pop.*
- [[Human|Humans]]: the ubiquitous inhabitants of Mir. Humans are found nearly everywhere they can survive on Mir due to their versatility, adaptability, and endless ambition. 
- [[Elf|Elves]]: the second-most populous people of Mir. Elven societies are most often found deep in nature, especially in the great forests of the world. 
- [[Dwarf|Dwarves]]: a short, stout, human-like people. As the primary inhabitants of the mountains and caves of Mir, Dwarven cities are often built around forges or mines.
- [[Hobbit (Halfling)|Hobbits (Halflings)]]: a distant relative of humanity, hobbits are similarly adaptable but are said to be lacking the same fiery ambition. They commonly live amongst humans, and are welcomed to cohabitate among other peoples due to their easygoing and peaceful nature.
- [[Gnome|Gnomes]]: humans that became [[fey|fey-touched]] a long time ago, and have been affected by their magic as a people ever since. Gnomes most commonly live alongside humans or the fey.
- [[Leshy|Leshies]]: plants given souls by primal magic. Leshies are mostly as averse to civilization as the rest of the fey, so most live in the fey wilds, deep in nature, or in their plant bodies' natural habitats, but some brave civilization to learn of the people-made wonders of the world.
- [[Goblin|Goblins]]: a broadly maligned group of short humanoids with oversized heads. Unwelcome in all but the seediest or the most accepting cities, most goblins live tribally or in small towns throughout the lands of [[Astrana]].
- [[Orc|Orcs]]: tall and strong humanoids, with an insular culture built around their capacity for great violence. While orcs are as versatile and adaptable as humans in their biology, their culture makes orcs a rare sight outside hired armies and mercenary work.
### Lesser Populations
*The people of Mir with smaller populations than the above, sorted alphabetically.*
- [[Athamaru]]: fish-like humanoids who primarily live in the ocean in small matriarchal communities. 
- [[Azarketi]]: a water-dwelling gilled descendant of the elves, with a variety of subspecies capable of living in various kinds of water (salt, fresh, murky, polluted).
- [[Catfolk]]: nomadic cat-like humanoids who often live in tight-knit traveling communities called catavans or tribes. Similarly adaptable to humans.
- [[Centaur|Centaurs]]: half-horse, half-human people who live all across the plains of Astrana. They are nomadic but generally live in tribes.
- [[Gnoll|Gnolls]]: hyena-like humanoids, often seen as animalistic and savage. Gnolls live in tribes all across the fertile lands of Astrana, where they are prolific hunters and are even known to consider humanoids as viable prey. Their culture is thought to be primitive, especially because of their endocannibalism: the eating of their own tribe's dead.
- [[Hobgoblin|Hobgoblins]]: half-human, half-goblins who are often powerful in goblin communities due to their greater stature and intelligence compared to the average goblin. They have a reputation for being rigid and militaristic in their rule.
- [[Kitsune]]: shape-changing fox-like humanoids, capable of transforming into another form depending on the people they grew up around. Kitsune live all over Mir, often hiding their fox-like form in order to blend in with people of other ancestries.
- [[Kobold|Kobolds]]: small humanoids and distant descendants of dragons. They revere their dragon ancestors but are unwelcome within their secretive civilization for an unknown reason. Kobolds often live in small colonies, both above and underground. Some live in cities, but are oft mistrusted and work hard to better their reputation.
- [[Lizardfolk]]: lizard-like humanoids with scales and tails who commonly live among other humanoids in their settlements and cities.
- [[Merfolk]]: half-human, half-fish created by an ancient divine curse who live all throughout Mir's ocean.
- [[Minotaur|Minotaurai]]: massive, horned, bovine humanoids also created by a divine curse. Minotaurai have lived underground throughout Mir since their creation, and have a culture centered around violence similar to that of the orcs'. They are often hired as mercenaries, guards, muscle, and even as arena gladiators for entertainment.
- [[Ratfolk]]: rat-like humanoids are an adaptable people with the capacity to fit their large families in places others would find unlivable or too cramped. Many lives in caverns and caves, but some live in cities amongst other people. They love to travel and can be found in all kinds of caravans.
- [[Sprite|Sprites]]: fey creatures, including all nature of small magical beings like fairies. They are diminutive, whimsical, exuberant creatures of the First World. Sprites who remain in the boundaries of the [[Fey Wilds|fey wilds]] are essentially immortal, able to reincarnate into other bodies and vessels as new sprites. Most sprites spend the whole of their existence within the fey wilds, and only venture out of it to explore the mortal world and see what it has to offer.
- [[Tengu]]: crow-like humanoids that have started spreading from their ancestral homeland in the past few centuries. Tengu are equally comfortable living in nature or in cities, as culturally they are resourceful scavengers capable of getting what they need from their surroundings without drastically changing them. 
### Minor Populations
*Small populations, uncommon enough to draw odd looks and questions most places they go.*
- [[Anadi]]: sapient spiders who learned in the distant past how to shapeshift into humans to make their appearance more palatable to other peoples. This magic shapeshifting ability became so prevalent in their culture that it is now genetic. The anadi do not want to be reclusive, but find it somewhat necessary to be comfortable in their natural form. Most live in villages in the rainforests and jungles of Astrana, but some have split off to start a separate society underground that rejects shape-shifting altogether.
- [[Androids]]: fabled synthetic humans originating from extraterrestrial technology. Androids are primarily thought to be real because a famed adventurer who claimed to have proof of their existence and origin died suspiciously before she was able to share her evidence with the world.
- [[Automatons|Automaton]]: a new 'people' to the world of Mir, automatons are intelligent constructs housing souls, inspired by the fey's creation of leshies. Most automatons are 'born' in [[Meldirias]], the city of progress at the heart of Astrana. Many return to the origins of their living souls, but others take the opportunity for a new life as an automaton and work in the city or for the highest bidders.
- [[Awakened Animal|Awakened Animals]]: normal creatures who gained sapience in any variety of ways, the most common being the fey ritual that translates to 'awaken animal' in [[Common]]. Awakened animals struggle to find their place in the world, with many opting to live with their biological families or braving the diverse cities of Mir. There are legends of a city that is only populated by awakened animals, but there is little evidence of its existence.
- [[Fetchling|Fetchlings]]: shadow-touched humans who are said to live in the [[Shadowlands]], a magic realm very little is known about that is said to be lorded over by demons.
- [[Fleshwarp|Fleshwarps]]: an umbrella term for any person whose form was created or drastically altered by magic, alchemy, or science. Their unusual appearances can make it difficult for them to find a place in the world.
- [[Ghoran]]: elves made of plant matter, born of an ancient powerful druid's horrific failed experiment to recreate a particular fey ritual. The ability to create ghoran died with him, so their population is small and dwindling. They do not die of natural causes, but they are hunted both by collectors and the fey. The fey see the ghoran as blasphemous creations of a heretic, and certain sects of the fey have wanted to see the extinction of the ghoran since they were created. The remaining ghoran consequently live in secrecy, and are rumored to be protected by the elves.
- [[Goloma]]: humanoid creatures with rough skin, a face covered by chitin, dozens of eyes, and massive jaws, the goloma are widely seen as monsters. Though they possess sapience and are capable of speaking Common, goloma have a unique kind of intelligence that makes them struggle to connect with other peoples. The combination of their off-putting physiology and distinct intellect are assumed to be the reason goloma primarily live underground in insular communities.
- [[Gripplis]]: frog-like humanoids that live in the jungles and rainforests of Astrana. Gripplis are rarely seen outside their habitat and keep mostly to their own settlements. Their limited interactions with other peoples are mainly for trade.
- [[Hungerseed|Hungerseeds]]: humanoid half-oni who resemble both their oni heritage mixed with their non-oni parent. Hungerseed are widely known as violent, cruel, and mischievous, and their repulsive reputation precedes them anywhere they go.
- [[Kashrishi]]: psychically-inclined rhino-like humanoids burdened with the ability to hear the thoughts of people they live near, who live in isolated places for their own peace of mind.
- [[Nagaji]]: half-naga, half-human servants of the naga. The naga themselves are isolationist, dedicated servants to certain divines, and the naga and nagaji alike are rarely seen outside their orders (religious colonies).
- [[Poppets]]: small, basic magical constructs modeled after puppets that occasionally gain sapience and the spark of life. They often live with their creators, but some pursue a life and purpose of their own.
- [[Samsaran|Samsarans]]: blue-skinned humanoids who can partially remember their past reincarnations and strive to achieve enlightenment. This pursuit of enlightenment means Samsarans can be found anywhere in the world, but are a rare enough sight to spark curiosity. 
- [[Sarangay]]: carabao-headed people with hooves who are said to live on a large remote island and rarely seen in Astrana, but they are occasionally seen in port cities near the island they inhabit. They resemble minotaurai with gemstones in their heads.
- [[Shoony|Shoonies]]: dog-like people of short stature who are renowned pacifists. They have a similar demeanor to hobbits. Shoonies commonly live in small fishing towns along rivers, lakes, and coasts or in populous protected cities.
- [[Skeletons]]: the reanimated bones of a creature. Most reanimated skeletons are functionally mindless, but the undead retain some might from their life, so some exceptional individuals are reanimated with personality or power corresponding. There are skeletons who are said to have grown independent of the magic that reanimated them and led their own lives, but it is considered little more than a fable.
- [[Strix]]: reclusive avian humanoids who mostly live in remote high places among their own species.
- [[Surki]]: an insectoid, metamorphic species who subsist on the magic of the world around them, and make great migrations underground across Astrana, so they are rarely seen on the surface.
- [[Tanuki]]: raccoon-like humanoid shape-changers. Tanuki are renowned tricksters and deceivers who primarily live in the remote northern mountains of Astrana. Tanuki outside these settlements may go largely undetected due to their remarkable capacity for shape-changing.
- [[Vanara]]: monkey-like humanoids descending from a demigod sired by a willspawn thousands of years ago. Most vanara live in the rainforests and jungles of Astrana, but are less reclusive than the gripplis.
- [[Vishkanya|Vishkanyas]]: a scaly, tall, ophidian people who have potent venom in their blood and saliva. They are said to originate from a god who has long since abandoned them, and are widely ostracized for their snake-like nature.
- [[Wayang|Wayangs]]: short, lean humanoids similar in stature to gnomes. They are said to be inhabitants of the Shadowlands that only occasionally visit Astrana, but are assumed to actually live underground.
- [[Yaksha|Yakshas]]: distant descendants of human fey guardians from the time of the First World. Yakshas in modern times see themselves as guardians of nature in general, and are colloquially known as wildfolk. Yakshas live anywhere there is nature to be protected or repaired.
- [[Yaoguai]]: originally simple animals, plants, or objects, yaoguai have awakened to sapience, usually through an imbuement of magic or energy into their original form. They become shape-changers, capable of transforming into a humanoid, seemingly determined by their exposure to humanoids or their original characteristics. Many yaoguai lack a community, but those born of animals often spend some part of their lives around their biological families. Others leverage their humanoid form to fit in with whatever species they appear to be.